<!--
  Auto-generated by kmpkg tools
  --------------------------------
  This section/template was generated by kmpkg for reference.
  You may modify it freely to suit your project needs.
  Recommended to keep the structure for consistency across projects.
  version: 0.6.0
  date: 2026-01-10
-->

goose
=============================

[中文版](./README_CN.md)


goose is kumo's `SQL` `IR` mid end. base on duckdb.

## 🛠️ Build

This project uses [kmpkg](https://github.com/kumose/kmcmake) for dependency management and build integration.
`kmpkg` automatically handles third-party library downloads, dependency resolution, and compiler flag configuration, avoiding the need to manually maintain complex CMake settings.


### 0. Prepare the environment

- Linux (Ubuntu 20.04+ / CentOS 7+ Recommended)
- CMake >= 3.20
- GCC >= 9.4 / Clang >= 12
- Make sure `kmpkg` is installed correctly, documents see [installation guide](https://kumo-pub.github.io/docs/category/%E6%8C%81%E7%BB%AD%E9%9B%86%E6%88%90----kmpkg)

### 1.Configure the project (optional)

* For the complete dependencies, refer to [`kmpkg.json`](kmpkg.json)
* To update the dependency baseline, modify the `baseline` in `default-registry` of [`kmpkg-configuration.json`](kmpkg-configuration.json)
* the `baseline` can be obtained via `git log`.


### 2. Build the project

Run in the project root directory:

```bash
cmake --preset=defualt
cmake --build build -j$(nproc)
```
#### Using Manual Dependency Management

If you manage dependencies yourself, you can build the project
with standard CMake commands:

```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make -j$(nproc)
```

**Note**

- `--preset=default` requires that the corresponding CMake preset is defined in the project root directory.
- When managing dependencies manually, make sure CMake’s find_package can locate all required libraries.

### 3. Run Tests (Optional)

Run in the project root directory:

```shell
ctest --test-dir build
```

## LICENSE

## LICENSE

This project is primarily licensed under the **Apache License 2.0**,
see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

This project incorporates code from third-party libraries:

- duckdb: <https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb>
  Licensed under the MIT license, see [duckdb.license](licenses/duckdb.license)

- pdqsort: <https://github.com/orlp/pdqsort>
  Licensed under the zlib/libpng license, see [licenses/pdq.license](licenses/pdq.license)

- skasort (ska_sort): <https://github.com/skarupke/ska_sort>
  Licensed under the Boost Software License, see [licenses/ska.license](licenses/ska.license)

- vergesort: <https://github.com/Morwenn/vergesort>
  Licensed under the Mit License, see [licenses/vergesort.license](licenses/vergesort.license)

These third-party libraries remain under their original respective licenses.
The Apache 2.0 license applies **only to the integration work and original code
developed as part of the kumo project**, not to the third-party libraries themselves.
